Rob Maier <rsm@math.arizona.edu> wrote the libplot/libplotter library and
the graphics programs graph, plot, tek2plot, and plotfont, beginning in
1995.  The old `GNU graphics' package (written by Rich Murphey
<rich@freebsd.org> in 1989-1991) served as a starting point, but the
plotutils package is at least an order of magnitude larger.  Probably none
of the code from the earlier package remains in libplot/libplotter or the
graphics programs.

spline and double were originally written by Rich.  They have been extended
by Rob, but some of Rich's code is still present.

tek2plot is based on the Tektronix parser written by in the mid-1980's by
Edward Moy (then of Berkeley, later at Xerox, and now at Apple).  This is
the parser used by `xterm', in the X11 distribution.

ode was written by Nick Tufillaro <nbt@reed.edu> in 1978-1994, and has been
somewhat modified and extended so as to merge it into the package.

Most of the code in pic2plot (the scanner and parser code, in particular)
is taken from gpic, i.e. GNU pic.  gpic was written in 1989-1992 by 
James J. Clark <jjc@jclark.com> as part of groff, i.e. GNU troff.  
A libplot driver was added, to turn it into pic2plot.

Rob wrote the texinfo manual (the chapter on ode draws heavily on Nick's
original ode documentation, which dates in part to the late 1970s).

The libxmi scan-conversion library was extracted by Rob from source files
in the X11 distribution, with modifications.  The source files were written
in the mid-to-late 1980's by Brian Kelleher, Joel McCormack, Todd Newman,
Keith Packard, Bob Scheifler and Ken Whaley, who worked for Digital
Equipment Corp., MIT, and/or the X Consortium.  Their contributions are
copyright 1985-89 by the X Consortium.  See ./libxmi/README-X for X
Consortium permission notices.
