These are some notes on backward compatibility of the plotutils package, on
both the user and programmer levels.

Release 2.1.1
-----------

No additions to libplot API, though libplot was improved in various ways.
The libplot version number is now 1.1.

Release 2.1
-----------

No incompatibilities with plotutils release 2.0.  But many new command-line
options added to user-level utilities, and the libplot API was expanded by
the addition of bgcolor() and bgcolorname().  The libplot version number is
now 1.0.

Release 2.0
-----------

In release 2.0 the idea of separate variants of the `graph', `plot', and
`tek2plot' programs for each display device was finally done away with.
There is now only a single instance of each program.  The display device is
specified by the `-T' option.

The merging of the device-specific variants was made possible by the
merging of the device-specific variants of the libplot library on which
they were based.  There is now only a single library, which is structured
in an object-oriented way.  There are new functions, newpl(), selectpl(),
openpl(), which allow the creation of an arbitrarily large number of
`Plotter' objects simultaneously.  Each Plotter produces output for one
display device.

On startup of libplot, a single default Plotter is created and selected,
namely one that produces GNU metafile format.  This is for backward
compatibility: it allows programs written for earlier versions of GNU
libplot, and even Unix libplot, to link with it and run as expected.  If
you prefer a different default Plotter type, you should select it at
installation time.  For example, including -DDEFAULT_PLOTTER_TYPE=\"ps\"
in your CFLAGS option will cause the default Plotter to produce
Postscript output instead.

The libplot API changed in release 2.0 in a few other ways.

1. falabel() was dropped from the API, and alabel() no longer returns a
value related to the width of the text string that it renders.  If you need
to get the width of a text string, use flabelwidth() or labelwidth().

2. The semantics of the arc() primitive have changed.  It now draws an arc
that may be clockwise as well as counterclockwise, but is restricted to
have opening angle no more than 180 degrees.  Also, it moves the graphics
cursor position to the endpoint of the arc.

3. The box() primitive now moves the graphics cursor to the midpoint of the
box, rather than to the second-specified vertex.

4. endpoly() has been renamed endpath(), and fill() has been renamed
filltype().  These last changes are temporarily supported by the plot.h
include file.

As of release 2.0 of the package, libplot has its own, independent,
versioning system.  The version of libplot distributed with release 2.0 is
numbered 0.0.  Beginning with version 0.0, libplot is installed both as a
static library and as a shared library (a DLL), on machines that support
shared libraries.
